.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" Man page for moses-exec
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2014 Linas Vepstas
.\"
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.pc
.TH EVAL-TABLE 1 "July 22, 2014" "3.6.10" "OpenCog Learning"
.LO 1
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
eval-table \- evaluate a combo program against a table of data.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" The help & version command line
.B eval-table
.RB \-h | \--help
.br
.\" The general command line
.B eval-table
.RB [ \-c
.IR combo_program ]
.RB [ \-C
.IR combo_program_file ]

.RB [ \-i
.IR input_table ]

.RB [ \-e
.IR force_feature ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR logfile ]
.RB \-I1 
.RB [ \-l
.IR loglevel ]
.RB \-L1
.RB [ \-o
.IR output_file ]
.RB [ \-r
.IR random_seed ]
.RB \-\-split\-output=1
.RB [ \-u
.IR target_feature ]
.RB [ \-Y
.IR ignore_feature ]


.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invoke bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
\fBeval-table\fP can be used to evaluate a combo expression on a table
of input values. For each row of the input table, the value of the combo
expression is printed.  In the typical usage scenario, the combo expression
was generated by the \fBmoses\fP machine learning system, and the data
table holds input data on which an inference is desired.

.SH SEE ALSO
.br
The \fBmoses\fR man page.
.PP
More information is available at
.B http://wiki.opencog.org/w/MOSES
.SH AUTHORS
.nh
\fBeval-table\fP was written by Nil Geisweiller.
.PP
This manual page is being written by Linas Vepstas. It is INCOMPLETE.

