# Progress summary of 150607-150613
* Beautiful version is available in [my wiki](http://wiki.dong-min.kim/GSoC_2015_-_Conceptual_Blending).

## Now
### In Progress
* Make inheritance-config check algorithm.
* Change algorithms to work only within given atoms, not in overall atomspace.
* Detect and improve conflict links in newly blended node.
  * Implement checking for some values in HebbianLink and SimilarityLink when 
   select link
  * Select one by random in 2^k possible things

### To do
**Think**

* Search for good algorithms to use in each step.

**Study**

* Read the research papers.
 * Goguen, *Mathematical Models of Cognitive Space and Time*
 * Markus, et al, *A computational account of conceptual blending in basic 
  mathematics*

**CodingCodingCoding**

* Detect and improve conflict links in newly blended node.
  * Implement evaluating degree of reasonable fitness using 
   information-theoretic method
   
### Pause
* Design about public API of my project, and make its document.
* Try to use Unified Rule Engine, PLN in python.
* Select nodes to blending.
  * Make the waiting queue of ConceptNode
  * Currently queue is not need for blending, because now agent make only one 
   new blended node in each step.
  * It will be useful when optimizing blending agent speed by save candidate 
   cache.
  * (15/06/14) I stopped to making Conceptual Blending with MindAgent design.
   It will be resumed when I finish to making Conceptual Blending API.

## Result
### Done
#### General
* Convert project structure to provide API from MindAgent structure.
* Implement 'Conceptual Blending Configuration' by atoms.
  * Design the 'Conceptual Blending Configuration format'.
  * Study 'BindLink, GetLink, PutLink' concepts and apply to my project.
  * Remove config by file system.

#### Algorithm
* Decide whether or not to execute blending and prepare.
  * Implement selecting ConceptNode which has best value (proper value)
    * Implemented by making 'blending-decider'.
* Check the duplicate links(not conflict) in each node and improve.
  * Implemented by making 'link-connector'.
  * Check the duplicate links was implemented by using 
   [Inverted Index](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverted_index) algorithm.
  * Evaluate the weighted average of TruthValue from participate atoms.
* Split the making new blend atom functions to 'new-blend-maker' class.

#### ETC
* Delete 'BlendTarget' concept completely, which was only useful in development 
 stage.
* Refactored many variable names.

### Fail & Deadline Missed
* Detect and improve conflict links in newly blended node.
  * Implement checking for some values in HebbianLink and SimilarityLink when 
   select link
  * Failed to finish implementing in May 30, 2015.
  * It will be continued to next period.
* Detect and improve conflict links in newly blended node.
  * Select one by random in 2^k possible things
  * Failed to finish implementing in May 30, 2015.
  * It will be continued to next period.
* Detect and improve conflict links in newly blended node.
  * Implement evaluating degree of reasonable fitness using 
   information-theoretic method
  * Failed to finish implementing in June 13, 2015.
  * It will be continued to next period.
  
### Cancel
* How to make blending agent to really useful to OpenCog?
  * My project is not stand-alone **agent**, but will be included to part of 
   OpenCog **API tool**.
  * So, the only one thing I have to work is this: Make new blend atom from 
   given source atoms and given rule(like fitness function?). Conceptual 
   Blending tool will be guaranteed to encapsulating works such as value 
   tweaking, link value merging, etc.   
* Use python or change to C++?
  * Especially during this week, I felt my understanding of OpenCog 
   framework structure is getting better than before. Guile isn't strange 
   language, and I can call them in my python code.
  * If I want to use C++ features, the only one thing I have to work is this: 
   Make python binding!
* Change config system to use cogserver's config system.
  * Canceled due to using cogserver was deprecated.
